Initial Governance draft (#1)
debezium/governance: GOVERNANCE.md

# Debezium Governance

This document defines the project governance for the [Debezium](https://github.com/debezium) project.

## Overview

Anyone can contribute to Debezium by following the [contribution workflow](https://github.com/debezium/debezium/CONTRIBUTE.md) or discussing features and improvements on GitHub issues.

> ## Project Roles

Reviewer: Should this also define a "Contributor" role? I.e. a community member e.g. proposing a PR, but who are not a committer (yet).

Author: I'll move that definition/description up from "Debezium Committers".

Author: Let's define "Contributor" role that active people automatically get.  It's better to be explicit than implicit.

For governance purposes, there are two formal roles for the Debezium project.

> * **Steering Committee**: A committee composed of committers with the final authority over all decisions made on te project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Steering Committee**: A committee composed of committers with the final authority over all decisions made on the project.
```

* **Committers**: A group of contributors with the right to merge pull requests into the Debezium repositories and publish releases.

> ## Debezium Committers

Reviewer 3: The release/publication is not defined here.

A Debezium committer is an individual who has been granted the right to merge pull requests into one of several Debezium GitHub repositories.
A pull request requires a voting/review procedure, outlined below in the [Voting Rules and Procedures](#voting-rules-and-procedures) section prior to merging.

To become a committer in the Debezium project, start by making approved pull requests.
After sufficient trust is built through with on Debezium, any current Debezium committer can nominate you to the steering committee for a committer role.

> Debezium's committers are listed in the [COMMITTERS.yml](./committers.yml).

Author: Need to define `committers.yml`.

## Steering Committee

The Debezium steering committee has the final authority over all decisions regarding the Debezium project, including:

* Whether pull requests are merged or retained in the event of a dispute.
* Who should become a committer or member of the steering committee.
* Whether any changes are necessary to the project's governance or other assets in this repository.

> Debezium's steering committee members are listed in the [COMMITTEE.yml](./committee.yml).

Author: Need to define `committee.yml`.

## Voting rules and procedures

> The Debezium project uses a voting system to guarantee no single member can dominate the project, and ensures continued success and diversity in the project's forward vision.

Reviewer 3: Member or entity?

> The formal voting process involves the creation of a GitHub issue, pull request, or steering committee mailing list email thread.

Reviewer 4: I would try to limit the number of ways / places where voting can happen. Mailing lists in particular seem a bit clunky to me -- I would stick with PR and issues.

Debezium uses several voting mechanisms and procedures for various purposes.

* [Pull request approvals](#pull-request-approvals)
* [Lazy consensus votes](#lazy-consensus-votes)
* [Explicit majority votes](#explicit-majority-votes)

Debezium also relies on the notion of **binding** and **non-binding** votes.

A **binding vote** is one cast by specific individuals with given roles based on the voting procedure, who's vote is used to calculate the outcome.
A **non-binding vote** is one cast by individuals who do not have binding vote roles, and these votes do not count toward the outcome, but are used to guide those with binding votes to a resolution that best fits all involved.

The following describes for each procedure, those who may vote, how the votes are recorded, and duration of the vote.

### Pull request approvals

Pull requests against most repositories may be merged after receiving at least two positive committer votes.
Voting for pull requests can be done using a comment or approving the pull request on GitHub.
If the pull request author is a member of the Debezium steering committee, this counts as one of the two required votes.

> Pull requests that are small, low-risk, uncontroversial, or prefixed with `[ci]` or `[docs]` may freely be merged by any committer without any votes.

Reviewer: Perhaps add an example or two of what constitutes an "uncontroversial" PR?

Whenever in doubt about the pull request's scope and risk, use the two positive vote requirement.

### Lazy consensus votes

Lazy consensus votes use the **+1**, **0**, or **-1** votes where:

* `+1` indicates **yes** or the **affirmative**
* `-1` indicates **no** or the **negative**
* `0` indicates you have no specific opinion

The voting process concludes when there are at least three `+1` binding votes, and no `-1` binding votes.

> The vote should be open for at least **TBD** days to allow everyone to participate.

Author: We need to deceide on `TBD` period for voting.

Reviewer: Do we know what e.g. Kafka or Flink do?

Reviewer 2: > The vote should remain open for at least 72 hours.

That's for [Kafka](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/kafka/kafka+improvement+proposals#KafkaImprovementProposals-WhoshouldinitiatetheKIP?)

Author: Strimzi is also 72 hours, so we could adopt the same.

Author: Discussed, we'll go with 72 hours.

### Explicit majority votes

An explicit majority vote is simply a `+1` or `-1` based vote.
The vote succeeds when at least **three binding** votes are cast, and two-thirds of cast binding values are `+1`.

> The vote should be open for at least **TBD** days to allow everyone to participate.

Author: We need to decide on `TBD` period for voting.

## Voting for specific subject areas

The following describes the voting procedures for specific subject areas.

### Governance changes

Except for the steering committee members marking themselves as Emeritus, all changes in the [governance](https://github.com/debezium/governance) repository require an explicit majority vote of steering committee members.
These votes are held on the steering committee's mailing lists, and the outcome will be publicly published.

> ### Add/remove steering committee members

Reviewer 3: Is the tenure going to be unlimited? What about having defined length of term where the member then needs to be confirmed or another one voted?

Author: I've reworded this based on our last discussion. Did I capture all points?

# Debezium Governance

> This document defines the project governance for the [Debezium](https://github.com/debezium) project.

Reviewer: Link to the website instead?

Author: All the governance documents I reviewed typically just had the project name text, so I added the link. I'm okay with adding it to the website. :+1:

## Overview

Anyone can contribute to Debezium by following the [contribution workflow](https://github.com/debezium/debezium/CONTRIBUTE.md) or discussing features and improvements on GitHub issues.

> To become a committer in the Debezium project, start by making approved pull requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By actively contributing for a continued period of time, contributors can become committers of the Debezium project.
To become a committer, start by making approved pull requests.
```

* Whether pull requests are merged or retained in the event of a dispute.
* Who should become a committer or member of the steering committee.
* Whether any changes are necessary to the project's governance or other assets in this repository.

Debezium's steering committee members are listed in the [COMMITTEE.yml](./committee.yml).

## Voting rules and procedures

The Debezium project uses a voting system to guarantee no single member or entity can dominate the project, and ensures continued success and diversity in the project's forward vision.

The formal voting process involves the creation of a GitHub issue or pull request.
A vote is indicated by specifying `yes` or `no` on the issue or pull request, which can include the thumbs-up or thumbs-down emojis.
After a defined period of time, votes are tallied, and the outcome is published.

Debezium uses several voting mechanisms and procedures for various purposes.

* [Pull request approvals](#pull-request-approvals)
* [Lazy consensus votes](#lazy-consensus-votes)
* [Explicit majority votes](#explicit-majority-votes)

Debezium also relies on the notion of **binding** and **non-binding** votes.

> A **binding vote** is one cast by specific individuals with given roles based on the voting procedure, who's vote is used to calculate the outcome.

Reviewer: Which roles are these, committer and steering committee member? If so, spell it out here for the sake of clarity?

Author: Overall, this is probably the area of the document I'm the least fond.

Conceptually what I was aiming for was to define voting procedures and terms separately in an overview section to minimize duplication of information, followed by sections for each focus area where voting or input is necessary, i.e. pull requests, governance changes, committer changes, committee changes, etc.

In hindsight, I agree that this entire area is confusing, and should likely be reorganized. I would propose we pull all PR-related things out into its top-level section. If any repositories, like this one, don't follow the PR process, we can explicitly list those.  I believe this creates a clear distinction on the voting semantics given that PRs would only require 2 committer approvals for merging, and avoids confusion about defining binding vs non-binding as that would be spelled out elsewhere.

Then we can have sections that relate to each of the specific topic areas around adding/removing committers, proposals, adding/removing steering committee members, governance, and so on. Each of these sections can outline which strategy it uses, link to a section below that describes that strategy, and what role is considered binding and non-binding.

Finally, for each voting strategy, we explicitly define the rules. 

In the end, we completely drop this top-level "Voting rules and procedures" and "Voting specific subject areas" and pull things up, relying on anchors between sections where applicable. 

Do you think that would organize the content better than what we have?

A **non-binding vote** is one cast by individuals who do not have binding vote roles, and these votes do not count toward the outcome, but are used to guide those with binding votes to a resolution that best fits all involved.

The following describes for each procedure, those who may vote, how the votes are recorded, and duration of the vote.

### Pull request approvals

Pull requests against most repositories may be merged after receiving at least two positive committer votes.
Voting for pull requests can be done using a comment or approving the pull request on GitHub.

> If the pull request author is a member of the Debezium steering committee, this counts as one of the two required votes.

Reviewer: So steering committee members need just one supportive vote by someone else? Not 100% sure how I feel about it, feels a bit like "rules for thee but not for me?" Let's discuss it in the call later today.

Author: This is something I borrowed from Strimzi, but I am certainly open to changing it if there are concerns.

Author: For now, let's take a lean and mean approach, focusing on consistency across the board.  There will need to be at least two committer/committee reviews, regardless of the author's role.

Pull requests that are small, low-risk, uncontroversial, or prefixed with `[ci]` or `[docs]` may freely be merged by any committer without any votes.
Examples of uncontroversial changes may include:

* Refactoring redundant code within a small number (2-5) of files that yields no behavior change.
* Adding or changing logged output.
* Adding or improving test suite code with no loss of test coverage.

Whenever in doubt about the pull request's scope and risk, use the two positive vote requirement.

### Lazy consensus votes

Lazy consensus votes use the **+1**, **0**, or **-1** votes where:

* `+1` indicates **yes** or the **affirmative**
* `-1` indicates **no** or the **negative**
* `0` indicates you have no specific opinion

> The voting process concludes when there are at least three `+1` binding votes, and no `-1` binding votes.

Reviewer: The "no -1" rule may cause some indefinite blocking of progress (it has burned out folks e.g. in the ASF before). Could we have an option that in case a lazy consensus vote is blocked for a longer period of time, that at the discretion of the steering committee an explicit majority vote over that matter can be hold in order to resolve the matter?

Author: Agreed. 

I have also personally submitted proposals to other projects in foundations using similar processes, and while the proposal gets :+1: from non-maintainers, they just sit idle with no activity from maintainers, for months, and some for years. I know I have found that equally frustrating. I can't imagine that would ever be the case for us, but should we add anything in the document around this to give contributors some expectation?

Author: Concluded, 1-month time period for the steering committee to step in resolving iterative looping due to `-1`.

The vote should be open for at least **TBD** days to allow everyone to participate.

### Explicit majority votes

An explicit majority vote is simply a `+1` or `-1` based vote.
The vote succeeds when at least **three binding** votes are cast, and two-thirds of cast binding values are `+1`.
The vote should be open for at least **TBD** days to allow everyone to participate.

## Voting for specific subject areas

The following describes the voting procedures for specific subject areas.

### Governance changes

Except for the steering committee members marking themselves as Emeritus, all changes in the [governance](https://github.com/debezium/governance) repository require an explicit majority vote of steering committee members.
These votes are held by the steering committee, and the outcome will be publicly published.

### Add/remove steering committee members

Votes to add or remove steering committee members require an explicit majority vote of steering committee members.
These votes are held by the steering committee, and the outcome will be publicly published.

> If a steering committee member is absent for more than 6-months without any prior notification of absence, the committee member will be moved to Emeritus status automatically.

Reviewer: This feels a bit harsh tbh. What exactly qualifies as absence? I think there should be a step first where the committee checks in, and only if they don't hear back in some time, the Emeritus status is achieved.

Author: What sort of turn-around would you say is reasonable for that check-in?  1 month or something less?

Reviewer 3: From my PoV 1 month check is perfect.
Absence should be deined as non-communication and no activity in the porject or project org.
Pracially I can imagine it will take more than 6 months as I don't think we'll have a tool to monitor this so it will take some time before somebody notices and raise the matter first.

Author: Agreed, a 1 month check-in / pulse check after the 6 months before moving to Emeritus.

## Overview

Anyone can contribute to Debezium by following the [contribution workflow](https://github.com/debezium/debezium/CONTRIBUTE.md) or discussing features and improvements on GitHub issues.
To become a committer in the Debezium project, start by making approved pull requests.
After sufficient trust is built through with on Debezium, any current Debezium committer can nominate you to the steering committee for a committer role.

## Project Roles

For governance purposes, there are two formal roles for the Debezium project.

> * **Steering Committee**: A committee composed of committers with the final authority over all decisions made on the project.

Reviewer 3: We have a list of comitters in `committers.yml`. Should there be a separate file for steering committee or a flag in the committers YAML?

Author: Right now the document outlines there is a `commitee.yml` that would have the GitHub names of those who are in the committee, separate from the `committers.yml`. I would prefer to keep those separate unless there is a good reason to consolidate. 

Perhaps the file names are too similar and that could be why it was missed on a second pass.  wdyt?

Reviewer 3: Well, yes, that would nice to have the names significantly different, they are very very similar.
Even just something like `steering-comittee.yml` is visualy very distinct.
